PLEP7: top level package structure (#26)
PlasmaPy/PlasmaPy-PLEPs: PLEP-0007.rst

| :directory: ``./plasmapy/dispersion/``                                       |
| :access: ``plasmapy.dispersion``                                             |
| :sub-package PLEP:                                                           |
| :scope:                                                                      |
|   | blah blah blah                                                           |
|   | blah blah blah                                                           |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **examples**                                                                 |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :directory: ``./plasmapy/examples/``                                         |
| :access: ``plasmapy.examples``                                               |
| :sub-package PLEP:                                                           |
| :scope:                                                                      |
|   | blah blah blah                                                           |

> |   | blah blah blah                                                           |

Reviewer: I've actually been thinking that it may be a good idea to move the examples out of the plasmapy directory and into the main repository; after all, they're not "importable" code and there is no explicit need to keep them there.

Author: Agreed.  I've removed the ``examples`` package from this PLEP and opened issue PlasmaPy/PlasmaPy#745.

| :access: ``plasmapy.formulary``                                              |
| :sub-package PLEP:                                                           |
| :scope:                                                                      |
|   A collection of functions, classes, and sub-packages that provide          |
|   mathematical and scientific formulas for calculating physical parameters   |
|   of various plasmas.                                                        |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **particle**                                                                 |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :directory: ``./plasmapy/particle/``                                         |
| :access: ``plasmapy.particle``                                               |
| :sub-package PLEP:                                                           |
| :scope:                                                                      |
|   | blah blah blah                                                           |

> |   | blah blah blah                                                           |

Reviewer: Are we renaming `atomic`, then?

Author: Yes, the that's the current plan.  We all determined `atomic` was a little too specific whereas `particle` can be more encompassing.

Reviewer 2: The name we use for this should encompass neutral atoms; ions; molecules; fundamental particles like electrons, positrons, muons, and neutrinos; charged dust grains; and custom particles.  

I'd prefer `plasmapy.particles` over `plasmapy.particle`, since it would reduce confusion to have a different pronunciation from the `Particle` class, and the subpackage would be describing the category of "particles".  

I've still been trying to think of alternatives to `plasmapy.particles` but I can't think of anything that would improve on it.

Reviewer: `particles` sound like a good idea, or, er, multiple good ideas! :smile:

+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| .. _plasma:                                                                  |
|                                                                              |
| **plasma**                                                                   |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :directory: ``./plasmapy/plasma/``                                           |
| :access: ``plasmapy.plasma``                                                 |
| :PLEP:                                                                       |
| :scope:                                                                      |
|   A collection of functions, classes, and sub-packages that fully defines a  |
|   plasma.  This would include the plasma's species constituents and physical |
|   parameters (like temperature, boundary conditions, magnetic fields, etc.). |
|                                                                              |
|   Any tools that go into defining a plasma or its environment (e.g. a field  |

> |   solver) should be included in a sub-package withing ``plasmapy.plasma``.   |

Author: `plasma` or `plasmas` may be to general of a name for this sub-packages. **What should we name this sub-package? @namurphy @StanczakDominik @tulasinandan Debate!!**

Possible names:
1. `plasma`
1. `plasmas`
1. `plasmata`
1. `plasma_builder`
1. `plasma_creator`
1. `plasma_source`
1. `plasma_generator`
1. `plasma_constructor`
1. `plasma_ensemble`
1. `plasma_system`
1. `plasma_state`
1. `plasma_fabricator`
1. `create_plasma`
1. `assemble_plasma`

I think `plasma_builder` is the most descriptive, but I really like single word packages and, in that case, I like `plasmata` for its uniqueness. ¯\\_(ツ)_/¯

Reviewer: - `pylasma`?
- `buildyourownplasma`?
- `plasma_DIY`?

I don't know. As I understand it, the idea is to supply some parameters of varying depth and resolution, and this is supposed to output an object that tells you about the various properties of the plasma, that you can potentially plug in as an initial condition for a simulation (just a thought!)...

What do you call something like that?

We could stick with `plasma`, I guess...

Author: build-your-own-plasma `plasmapy.byop`...this is a little devilish, so I kinda like it 😈

Reviewer 3: 11. plasma_state is a PPPL data storage format so it would be good to avoid for the MFE community.

Reviewer: For the record, I've been getting exponentially less opposed to `plasmapy.plasma` with time!

| **analysis**                                                                 |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :directory: ``./plasmapy/analysis/``                                         |
| :access: ``plasmapy.analysis``                                               |
| :PLEP:                                                                       |
| :scope:                                                                      |
|   A sub-package focused on providing analysis techniques that can be         |
|   applied to data collected from a variety of sources (simulation,           |
|   experimental, space, etc.).                                                |
|                                                                              |
|   The focus of an analysis routine should be made as broad as possible.      |
|   When the routine's functionality becomes highly-tailored to its            |
|   application, then it should be placed into an explicitly appropriate       |
|   namespace.  For example, linear, langmuir, magnetic-flux, etc. analysis    |

> |   tools should be placed in their respective namespaces.                     |

Author: This is exactly my view on this.  Hopefully that's what is interpreted from the package description.  In the future, we could have a PLEP for the `plasmapy.analysis` package, but that's beyond this PLEP.

|   to ``plasmapy.analysis`` routines.                                         |
|                                                                              |
|   A "``Diagnostic``" class should fully define its diagnostic                |
|   characteristics and provide access to its most relevant analysis tools     |
|   found in ``plasmapy.analysis``.                                            |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| .. _dispersion:                                                              |
|                                                                              |
| **dispersion**                                                               |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :directory: ``./plasmapy/dispersion/``                                       |
| :access: ``plasmapy.dispersion``                                             |
| :PLEP:                                                                       |
| :scope:                                                                      |

> |   A sub-package dedicated to solving various plasma dispersion relations.    |

Reviewer 2: Maybe `...solving dispersion relations for various plasma waves and instabilities.`?

Author: Maybe something more like...

> A sub-package dedicated to providing tools to work with plasma dispersion relations.  This includes, but not limited to, solving various dispersion relations, defining dispersion functions, plotting dispersion relations, etc.

|                                                                              |
|   All dispersion solvers defined in this sub-package should be accessible    |

> |   through a dispersion solver factory class, ``DispersionSolver``.           |

Reviewer 2: I'm still inclined to not include implementation details in this PLEP, since if we think of a better way then we wouldn't have to go through the process of changing this PLEP.

Author: I get that.  I'll go ahead and remove this statement.

|   (electron, ion, atom, etc.) to more exotic types like dust particles,      |
|   dimensionless particles for simulations, super-particles for simulations,  |
|   etc.                                                                       |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| .. _plasma:                                                                  |
|                                                                              |
| **plasma**                                                                   |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :directory: ``./plasmapy/plasma/``                                           |
| :access: ``plasmapy.plasma``                                                 |
| :PLEP:                                                                       |
| :scope:                                                                      |
|   A sub-package that fully defines a plasma.  This would include the         |
|   plasma's species constituents and physical parameters (like temperature,   |

> |   boundary conditions, magnetic fields, etc.).                               |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|   boundary conditions, magnetic fields, distribution functions, etc.).                               |
```

|                                                                              |
|   Any tools that go into defining a plasma or its environment (e.g. a field  |

> |   solver) should be included in a sub-package within ``plasmapy.plasma``.    |

Reviewer 2: Hm...I'm wondering about how to fit this in with classes to define initial conditions in `plasmapy.simulation`.   But, that's an issue for another day.

Author: yeah, there will probably be some cross over there.🤔

|   included in the ``plasmapy.diagnostics`` sub-package.                      |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| .. _tests:                                                                   |
|                                                                              |
| **tests**                                                                    |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :directory: ``./plasmapy/tests/``                                            |
| :access: ``plasmapy.tests``                                                  |
| :PLEP:                                                                       |
| :scope:                                                                      |
|   A collection of tests for top-level modules (i.e. functions and classes    |
|   defined in top-level ``.py`` files).                                       |
|                                                                              |
|   Utility's associated with running and developing tests (e.g.               |

> |   ``pytest_helpers``) should also be included here over ``plasmapy.utils``.  |

Reviewer 2: I'd remove the ```(e.g., ``pytest_helpers``)``` since the new place I'm putting things is `plasmapy.tests.helper` (which is akin to `astropy.tests.helper` to have some consistency between packages).

Reviewer 2: (Also, for consistency with `plasmapy.utils`, should this be a `.. note::` thing too?

Author: To make things less specific I quoted "pytest helpers" instead of directly naming ``pytest_helpers``.   I like leaving the example in there and the new wording does not restrict us to a sub-package structure.

I also made this a ``.. note::``

+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :directory: ``./plasmapy/utils/``                                            |
| :access: ``plasmapy.utils``                                                  |
| :PLEP:                                                                       |
| :scope:                                                                      |
|   A collection of "utility" functions and classes to help us write           |
|   (what we try to think of as) clean, readable, and informative code.        |
|                                                                              |
|   This collection does not provide any physics tools, instead it is          |
|   focused on providing package development tools.                            |
|                                                                              |
|   .. note:: Utilities focused on running and developing tests should be      |
|             placed in ``plasmapy.tests`` instead.                            |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Implementation
==============

> Implementing this PLEP requires refactoring (renaming of moving) of existing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Implementing this PLEP requires creating new and renaming or moving existing
```

Reviewer 2: (at the very least, `of` in the parentheses should be changed to `or`)

Author: ok...re-worded

| :directory: ``./plasmapy/addons/``                                           |
| :access: ``plasmapy.addons``                                                 |
| :PLEP:                                                                       |
| :scope:                                                                      |
|   The ``addons`` sub-package is a `native namespace package`_ setup          |
|   in accordance with the `PEP 420`_ guidelines.                              |
|                                                                              |
|   A collection of functions, classes, and sub-packages focused on providing  |
|   analysis techniques that can be applied to data collected from a variety   |
|   of sources (simulation, experimental, space, etc.).                        |
|                                                                              |
|   The focus of an analysis routine should be made as broad as possible.      |
|   When the routine's functionality becomes highly-tailored to its            |
|   application, then it should be placed into an appropriate explicit         |

> |   namespace.                                                                 |

Reviewer 2: Should delete this, as it's a repeat of text from the analysis subpackage.

|   A collection of functions, classes, and sub-packages dedicated to solving  |
|   various plasma dispersion relations.                                       |
|                                                                              |
|   All dispersion solvers defined in this sub-package should be accessible    |
|   through a dispersion solver factory class, ``DispersionSolver``.           |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| .. _formulary:                                                               |
|                                                                              |
| **formulary**                                                                |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :directory: ``./plasmapy/formulary/``                                        |
| :access: ``plasmapy.formulary``                                              |
| :PLEP:                                                                       |
| :scope:                                                                      |

> |   A collection of functions, classes, and sub-packages that provide          |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|   A collection of functions, classes, and modules that provide          |
```

|   of various plasmas.                                                        |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| .. _particles:                                                               |
|                                                                              |
| **particles**                                                                |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :directory: ``./plasmapy/particles/``                                        |
| :access: ``plasmapy.particles``                                              |
| :PLEP:                                                                       |
| :scope:                                                                      |
|   A collection of functions, classes, and sub-packages that fully defines    |
|   the properties of a "particle."  A "particle" can come in many forms       |
|   ranging from a traditional particle (electron, ion, atom, etc.) to more    |
|   exotic types like dust particles, dimensionless particles for simulations, |

> |   super-particles for simulations, etc.                                      |

Reviewer 2: Yeah, we should definitely expand `plasmapy.particles` to include dust particles!

|                                                                              |
|   All types of particles in this sub-package should be able to be            |

> |   instantiated through a particle factory class, ``Particle``.               |

Reviewer 2: I'm not certain that we want to specify this much detail here.  I'm wondering if we will end up having a separate `CustomParticle` class to represent user-defined particles, as that would require a lot of different arguments than for a typical `Particle` instance.  My inclination is for this PLEP to be agnostic about the implementation.

+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| .. _plasma:                                                                  |
|                                                                              |
| **plasma**                                                                   |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :directory: ``./plasmapy/plasma/``                                           |
| :access: ``plasmapy.plasma``                                                 |
| :PLEP:                                                                       |
| :scope:                                                                      |
|   A collection of functions, classes, and sub-packages that fully defines a  |
|   plasma.  This would include the plasma's species constituents and physical |
|   parameters (like temperature, boundary conditions, magnetic fields, etc.). |
|                                                                              |
|   Any tools that go into defining a plasma or its environment (e.g. a field  |

> |   solver) should be included in a sub-package withing ``plasmapy.plasma``.   |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|   solver) should be included in a sub-package named ``plasmapy.plasma``.   |
```

|   If a new feature falls under the scope of the ``analysis`` and/or          |
|   ``diagnostics`` sub-packages, then the feature should be included one of   |
|   respective packages.  For example, a synthetic diagnostic should be        |
|   included in the ``plasmapy.diagnostics`` sub-package.                      |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| .. _tests:                                                                   |
|                                                                              |
| **tests**                                                                    |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :directory: ``./plasmapy/tests/``                                            |
| :access: ``plasmapy.tests``                                                  |
| :PLEP:                                                                       |
| :scope:                                                                      |
|   A collection of tests for top-level modules (i.e. functions and classes    |

> |   defined in top-level ``.py`` files).                                       |

Reviewer 2: We'll need to expand this so that `plasmapy.tests` includes test helper functionality too (akin to `astropy.tests`).

|   focused on providing package development tools.                            |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

.. +------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   | **examples**                                                                 |
   +------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   | :directory: ``./plasmapy/examples/``                                         |
   | :access: ``plasmapy.examples``                                               |
   | :PLEP:                                                                       |
   | :scope:                                                                      |
   |   A collection of routines showing how to use and/or interface with the      |
   |   various PlasmaPy tools.                                                    |
   +------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Implementation
==============

*Describe the steps necessary to implement this PLEP, if necessary.*

Issues, Pull Requests, and Branches

> ===================================

Reviewer 2: Will need to add: https://github.com/PlasmaPy/PlasmaPy/pull/742

Author: I started a project related to implementing PLEP 7, [here](https://github.com/PlasmaPy/PlasmaPy/projects/14), and placed the link in this PLEP.  As the associated PRs open, then I'll add those links too.

*Provide repository links related to this PLEP, and include
descriptions.*

Backward Compatibility
======================

This PLEP will NOT maintain backward compatibility.

Alternatives

> ============

Reviewer 2: I suspect we can skip the alternatives section, since the information going into this section might fit better in the decision rationale.

| **analysis**                                                                 |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :directory: ``./plasmapy/analysis/``                                         |
| :access: ``plasmapy.analysis``                                               |
| :PLEP:                                                                       |
| :scope:                                                                      |
|   A sub-package focused on providing analysis techniques that can be         |
|   applied to data collected from a variety of sources (simulation,           |
|   experimental, space, etc.).                                                |
|                                                                              |
|   The focus of an analysis routine should be made as broad as possible.      |
|   When the routine's functionality becomes highly-tailored to its            |
|   application, then it should be placed into an explicitly appropriate       |
|   namespace.  For example, linear, langmuir, magnetic-flux, etc. analysis    |

> |   tools should be placed in their respective namespaces.                     |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|   tools should be placed in their respective namespaces within               |
|   ``plasmapy.analysis``.                                                     |
```

|   solver) should be included in a sub-package within ``plasmapy.plasma``.    |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| .. _simulation:                                                              |
|                                                                              |
| **simulation**                                                               |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :directory: ``./plasmapy/simulation/``                                       |
| :access: ``plasmapy.simulation``                                             |
| :PLEP:                                                                       |
| :scope:                                                                      |
|   A sub-package focused on interfacing with simulations and/or running       |
|   simulations.                                                               |
|                                                                              |
|   If a new feature falls under the scope of the ``analysis`` and/or          |

> |   ``diagnostics`` sub-packages, then the feature should be included one of   |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|   ``diagnostics`` sub-packages, then the feature should be included in one of|
```

|   respective sub-packages.  For example, a synthetic diagnostic should be    |
|   included in the ``plasmapy.diagnostics`` sub-package.                      |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| .. _tests:                                                                   |
|                                                                              |
| **tests**                                                                    |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :directory: ``./plasmapy/tests/``                                            |
| :access: ``plasmapy.tests``                                                  |
| :PLEP:                                                                       |
| :scope:                                                                      |
|   A collection of tests for top-level modules (i.e. functions and classes    |
|   defined in top-level ``.py`` files).                                       |
|                                                                              |

> |   .. note:: Utility's associated with running and developing tests (e.g.     |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|   .. note:: Utilities associated with running and developing tests (e.g.     |
```

+-------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| contact email     | eeverson@ucla.edu                           |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| date created      | 2019-10-27                                  |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| date last revised | 2020-05-12                                  |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| type              | Standard                                    |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| status            | Accepted                                    |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| DOI               | `10.5281/zenodo.3774573`_                   |
|                   |                                             |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------+

**Contents**

* `Abstract`_
* `Detailed Description`_

  * `Why?`_
  * `Top-Level Sub-Packages`_

* `Extensible Packages are Exempt`_
* `Implementation`_
* `Issues, Pull Requests, and Branches`_
* `Backward Compatibility`_

> * `Decision Rationale`_

Reviewer 2: As an aside, maybe we should add a table of contents to the PLEP template.  That way, future PLEP writers would have a draft table of contents ready.

Abstract
========

This PLEP defines the top-level structure of ``PlasmaPy`` (i.e.
``plasmapy.<subpackage>``).  Its intent is to name the top-level
sub-packages and define the general scope of each package.
Sub-package details are left to be defined in package focused PLEPs,
which should *NOT* conflict with this PLEP.  Defining the top-level
structure should:

  #. keep the top-level namespace from getting bloated
  #. help developers decided where new code should be placed
  #. help navigate users to the functionality they need

If new code does NOT fall within the current framework, then this PLEP
needs to be modified/updated accordingly before any new top-level

> sub-packages are created.

Reviewer 4: Or, presumably, the code should be ajusted to fit this framework?

Author: I've reworded this a bit to indicate that amending the PLEP should be the last resort option.  I assumed that would happen by default, since it will always be easier to conform code than to amend the PLEP and get it accepted.

This statement is here more so for the off chance that we overlooked something that should be a top-level package.

Detailed Description
====================

Why?
----

By defining the top-level sub-package namespace developers are better
directed to where code should be added, the ``PlasmaPy``
`Coordinating Committee
<https://github.com/PlasmaPy/PlasmaPy-PLEPs/blob/master/PLEP-0003.rst>`_
can better manage package bloat, and users are better directed to the code
they need.

Top-Level Sub-Packages
----------------------

.. _`PlasmaPy`: https://www.plasmapy.org/
.. _`NRL Plasma Formulary`: https://www.nrl.navy.mil/ppd/content/nrl-plasma-formulary

The following sub-packages are outlined in this PLEP, with brief synopses given in
the tables below.  The details of each package are left to be fully defined by their
respective package PLEPs.

  #. `addons`_
  #. `analysis`_
  #. `diagnostics`_
  #. `dispersion`_
  #. `formulary`_
  #. `particles`_

>   #. `plasma`_

Reviewer 5: I forget if we decided to have a separate fields subpackage or if we wanted to keep fields a part of plasma subpackage.

Author: Yes, as the [*scope* for `plasmapy.plasma`](https://github.com/rocco8773/PlasmaPy-PLEPs/blob/PLEP7_top_level_package_structure/PLEP-0007.rst#plasma) details, anything that is part of defining the plasma environment (include fields) would be placed within `plasmapy.plasma`.

Reviewer 5: That is what confused me. I would typically think of field solvers as being complicated enough to be a sub-package by themselves, given that the field equations will be very different based on what approximation (Boltzmann, Vlasov, Fluid, GK...) we're working with. 

However, now I remember part of our discussion at DPP. Part of the discussion was whether we would need/want to reproduce a lot of EM field solver libraries or if would want to have just enough for our purposes. Most people on the table wanted to keep the scope limited and within the plasma sub-package, so I had agreed to this option. 

Now that I remember the details, I will approve the pull request.

  #. `simulation`_
  #. `tests`_
  #. `utils`_

.. _addons:

+-----------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| **addons**                                                                    |
+=================+=============================================================+
| directory:      | ``./plasmapy/addons/``                                      |
+-----------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| access:         | ``plasmapy.addons``                                         |
+-----------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| PLEP:           |                                                             |
+-----------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| scope:          | | The ``addons`` sub-package is intended to be a plugin     |

> |                 |   location to allow 3rd party users to extent the           |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
|                 |   location to allow 3rd party users to extend the           |
```

|                 |   should be included in the ``plasmapy.diagnostics``        |
|                 |   sub-package.                                              |
+-----------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+

.. _tests:

+-----------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| **tests**                                                                     |
+=================+=============================================================+
| directory:      | ``./plasmapy/tests/``                                       |
+-----------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| access:         | ``plasmapy.tests``                                          |
+-----------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| PLEP:           |                                                             |
+-----------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| scope:          | | A collection of tests for top-level modules (i.e.         |
|                 |   functions and classes defined in top-level ``.py``        |

> |                 |   files).                                                   |

Reviewer 4: Surely we also want to test functions and classes defined in subfolders of these modules?

Reviewer: I thought folders of .py files were subpackages, and if that's the case, the current wording makes sense - there's no other place to put tests for .py files in the main plasmapy directory.

Author: In the python lingo, `.py` files are modules and folders are sub-packages.

@SolarDrew Yes, sub-package tests should still be done within their respective directory.

Reviewer 5: Think of this as a place for testing the interplay of various sub-packages. Will using dispersion capability in simulation break anything? Will using formulary inside analysis break anything?

|   focused on providing package development tools.                            |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

..
   +------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   | **examples**                                                                 |
   +------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   | :directory: ``./plasmapy/examples/``                                         |
   | :access: ``plasmapy.examples``                                               |
   | :PLEP:                                                                       |
   | :scope:                                                                      |
   |   A collection of routines showing how to use and/or interface with the      |
   |   various PlasmaPy tools.                                                    |
   +------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

> 

Reviewer: Oh, you commented this out! Clever, that was mighty confusing :D

Author: Yeah, I didn't want to throw it away until we make the final decision.  It'll be re-implemented or deleted before I remove the "draft" on the PR.
